
 ERCB: The C++ Programming Language, Third Edition 
[ ERCB Home |
 New |
 Feature |
 Brief |
 Archive |
 Received |
 Letters |
 Classifieds |
 Links 
]
Vital Statistics
 
Title C++ Programming Language: Third Edition 
Author Bjarne Stroustrup 
Publisher Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc.
 
Reading, Massachusetts
 http://www.aw.com/devpress/ 
 
Copyright 1997 
ISBN 0-201-88954-4 
Pages 910 
Price $44.95 
 
 
The Gospel According to Bjarne
 
 Bjarne Stroustrup's The C++ Programming Language, Third
Edition (Addison-Wesley, 1997) has been available for
several months. This work, by the creator of C++, is the
definitive treatment of the subject and has been since its
first edition in 1987. I must confess that I did not care
for the first edition. I had expected a tutorial approach as
elegant as the classic K&R white book. But then, K&R was
about C, a programming language that supported a familiar
programming model. The C++ programming model was new to most
of us ten years ago, and Stroustrup's first edition was
daunting, to say the least. Looking at it now, I find it far
less so and much easier to read. 
Comparing the first and third editions of The C++
Programming Language provides insight into how the C++
language has grown and changed in the past decade. The third
edition has almost three times the number of pages and a
slightly different organization. Whereas the first edition
included a 67-page language reference manual at the end, the
third edition includes only a language grammar section to
represent formal language definition. This is appropriate.
The ANSI/ISO Standard document, which is now the formal
language and library definition, is itself about 750 pages
long. Stroustrup plans to publish The Annotated C++ Language
Standard (coauthored by Andrew Koenig, the ANSI C++
committee's Project Editor) sometime this year. 
The third edition takes a tutorial approach with many of
Stroustrup's personal programming philosophies. The author's
explanations of how he uses language features provide
examples for learning the behavior of those features. He
also explains code idioms that some programmers routinely
use but that he finds inappropriate. 
As much as possible, the third edition reflects Standard C++. 
When small language features are found to be missing,
particularly new ones, Stroustrup pledges to add them to a
future printing. 
The book includes many code examples. There is no diskette
or CD-ROM, because Stroustrup avoids a teaching approach
wherein readers compile and run examples. His examples are
mostly code fragments that demonstrate the points he makes
and the issues he addresses. The code fragments are
readable, meaningful, and neither frivolous nor cute, and
since you do not compile them, you need not worry that your
compiler does not fully support Standard C++.
There are four parts to the body of the book: "Part I: Basic
Facilities;" "Part II: Abstract Mechanisms;" "Part III: The
Standard Library;" and "Part IV: Design Using C++." Even if
you are already a seasoned C++ programmer, Part IV, which is
a rewrite of several chapters from the second edition, is
worth the price of the book. It describes Stroustrup's
philosophies on the design and development cycle of a
software project involving C++. In his words, Part IV aims
"to bridge the gap between would-be language-independent
design and programming that is myopically focused on
details." 
The three appendixes are: "A: The C++ Grammar;" "B:
Compatibility;" and "C: Technicalities." Appendix B
discusses the differences between C and C++ and explains how
the languages have become more compatible over time. Some of
this convergence results from changes being made to the C
specification (double-slash comments and no implicit int,
for example). The appendix also discusses the issues related
to porting C++ code from older C++ implementations, advising
that, where possible, you should use the latest
implementation of a compiler so that newer features are
available to you. 
Appendix C is about technical details that a programmer
faces that are not necessarily language issues. I
particularly like the discussion on the problems associated
with traditional multidimensioned arrays as compared to
using STL containers to achieve the same result without the
headaches. 
This book is an essential addition to a C++ programmer's
library. It is not for dummies, and it wouldn't be my first
choice for an entry-level, self-help tutorial on C++ for
beginning programmers. It is, however, an excellent textbook
for programmers who are self-motivated and students who
study under the watchful care of a skilled instructor. As an
experienced C++ programmer, I find the book useful as a
reference to language usage and behavior. The author
invented the language and then stayed close to the
standardization and innovation process for the duration,
always maintaining a careful vigilance over the evolution of
his brainchild. Consequently, this book serves, for those
who do not care to pore over the ANSI/ISO document (or the
promised annotated version), as the authority on the
Standard C++ language, how it works, and how you should use
it. 
-- Al Stevens 
Copyright ©1998 DDJ Electronic Review of Computer Books
Created 3/31/1998 / Last modified 3/31/1998 / webmaster@ercb.com
